\begin{defin}\label{logic:def:GENZ:provableseq:LK:proof}
Let $V$ be a set with associated Gentzen sequent proof type
$\alpha$. We call {\em Free Universal Algebra of $\bf LK$-Proofs}
associated with $V$, the free universal algebra \svs\ of type
$\alpha$  with free generator the initial sequents \svo.
\end{defin}

\begin{defin}\label{logic:def:GENZ:provableseq:valuation}
Let $V$ be a set. We call valuation mapping on \svs\ the unique
morphism $\val:\svs\to\sv$ with
$\val(\phi\vdash\phi)=(\phi\vdash\phi)$ for all $\phi\in\pv$.
\end{defin}

\begin{defin}\label{logic:def:GENZ:provableseq:provable:sequent}
Let $V$ be a set. We say that an $\bf LK$-proof $\pi\in\svs$ is a
{\em proof} of the sequent $s\in\sv$ \ifand\ $\val(\pi)=s$. We say
that a sequent $s\in\sv$ is {\em provable} \ifand\ there exists an
$\bf LK$-proof $\pi\in\svs$ of $s$.
\end{defin}

\begin{prop}\label{logic:prop:GENZ:provableseq:provable:is:generated}
Let $V$ be a set. A sequent $s\in\sv$ is provable, \ifand\ it
belongs to the sub-algebra $\langle \svo\rangle$ generated by the
initial sequents.
\end{prop}
\begin{proof}
Note that since $\svo\subseteq\sv$ and $\svo\subseteq\svs$ while
\sv\ and \svs\ are both universal algebras, the notation $\langle
\svo\rangle$ for the sub-algebra generated by \svo\ is highly
ambiguous since it is not clear whether we are referring to the
sub-algebra of \sv\ of the sub-algebra of \svs. However, the context
should make it sufficiently clear. For example, $\langle
\svo\rangle$ in
proposition~(\ref{logic:prop:GENZ:provableseq:provable:is:generated})
clearly refers to the sub-algebra of \sv\ since the set of provable
sequents must be a subset of \sv. From
definition~(\ref{logic:def:GENZ:provableseq:provable:sequent}), a
sequent $s\in\sv$ is provable \ifand\ it belongs to the homomorphic
image $\val(\svs)$. Thus, we need to show the following equality
between the two sub-algebras of \sv\,:
    \[
    \val(\svs)=\langle \svo\rangle
    \]
However from definition~(\ref{logic:def:GENZ:provableseq:LK:proof}),
the algebra \svs\ has free generator \svo. In particular from
proposition~(\ref{logic:prop:free:generator:generator}), \svo\ is a
generator of \svs\, i.e. we have $\svs=\langle \svo\rangle$ (the
sub-algebra of \svs). Hence, using
proposition~(\ref{logic:prop:UA:subalg:generated:direct:image})\,:
    \begin{eqnarray*}
    \val(\svs)&=&\val(\,\langle \svo\rangle\,)\\
    \mbox{prop.~(\ref{logic:prop:UA:subalg:generated:direct:image})}
    \ \rightarrow
    &=&\langle\,\val(\svo)\,\rangle\\
    \mbox{def.~(\ref{logic:def:GENZ:provableseq:valuation})}\ \rightarrow
    &=&\langle\,\svo\,\rangle\\
    \end{eqnarray*}
\end{proof}
